The first day of Rebooting the Web of Trust V was our meet, greet, and setup. We seemed to have more than 50 people, which I suspect is the largest RWOT design workshop to date. 

After some initial discussions, we soon began talking about "weak signals": subject matter that might be of interest to the members of our group, but which they might not know about. These covered a <a href="https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/tree/master/event-documents/lightning-talks">variety of topics</a>, from interesting theories like the "Identity Mental Models" to interesting problems like that of "offline solutions" to interesting report-outs like "BOPS". These "lightning talks" were scheduled for two hours, but we ended up about double that because of the interest and discussion.

The main point of RWOT is of course to generate papers, specs, and code. So, with the day rapidly escaping from us around 5pm we fractured into a number of different groups. Here's where the participant numbers really paid off: we're currently planning for <a href="https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/event-documents/plenaries/3-first-day-close.md">eight papers from seven groups, plus a revision of the DID spec from our DID spinoff</a>. Now, often a paper or two doesn't survive first contact with the enemy, but we've nonetheless started in on a very healthy crop of projects on a variety of interesting topics.

People afterward headed out for dinner and then home to think about their topics. Tomorrow will largely see the start of the paper brainstorming and writing. It'll be the main work day, with some report-outs on other topics scheduled for mid-day when people fade a bit.
