Day Two of Rebooting the Web of Trust V was largely about creating our outputs: the white papers, specs, and code that are the purpose of the design workshop. We seem to still be working toward <a href="https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/event-documents/plenaries/3-first-day-close.md">eight papers</a> plus a new iteration of the DID spec. The particular group I was working with, which is building a DID-related user-engagement model, met its goal of assembling a full outline of what the 15 stages of user engagement would look like for a DID system. This was the important part because it was where our (large) group was able to talk through all the ideas, taking full advantage of our collaboration. The hope is to first draft the text tomorrow, but it was the collaboration today that was critical to get while everyone was together

We were interrupted about an hour after lunch to see &quot;demos&quot;. I think many of us wanted to continued working, but on the other hand <a href="https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/event-documents/plenaries/4-demos.md">these demos</a> were hugely aspirational. That's because they were seven examples of actual software that had been built related to decentralized identifiers (DIDs). The aspirational thing here is that DIDs didn't exist before the first Rebooting Web of Trust workshop, just 23 months ago. In that time, quite short in the epoch of internet standards, they've gone from not-even-an-idea to a spec funded by the US gov't to something being considered by the W3C to something being supported in software by multiple people. We've long hoped that we could influence the next generation of the Web of Trust, and DIDs are proving that we can.

-Shannon
