# A Primer on Self-Sovereign Identity

#### By Christopher Allen, Shannon Appelcline, and Natalie Smolenski

## A Self-Sovereign Definition

> Self-sovereign identity is an independent, self-referential "container" owned by a person who has control over how the properties that accrue to that identity over time are managed and disclosed.

This core definition of self-sovereign identity is a simple one, affirming that identity belongs to an individual person and cannot be taken from them. It also differentiates between identity as a container and identity as any given property of a person, since properties change over time. Any attempt to permanently collapse the identity container with any identity property is an attempt at control that is at odds with a commitment to self-sovereign identity. 

Identity containers may be nested and multiple. In digital space, as in everyday human social life, individuals may have an unlimited number of identities (containers) associated with different properties and deployed for different purposes. Conventionally referred to as "personas," these identity containers each point back to the ultimate referent: the self of the person who owns them, and whose selfhood exceeds the parameters of any particular container. 

For the purposes of self-sovereign digital architecture, solving for anything like the ultimate self of a digital subject is not only unnecessary and a setup for easy usurpation of identities by hostile actors, but ultimately impossible. Rather, the two major issues at stake in digital identity are [addressability over time and verification of claims](https://medium.com/learning-machine-blog/identity-and-digital-self-sovereignty-1f3faab7d9e3). These will be addressed in more detail in the final section of this primer. Joe Andrieu's [Primer on Functional Identity](https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/topics-and-advance-readings/functional-identity-primer.md) articulates this "functional identity" clearly: "Identity is how we keep track of people and things and, in turn, how they keep track of us." Accordingly, two major projects at the W3C address both aspects of functional digital identity: Decentralized Identifiers are concerned with addressability over time, while Verified Claims form the structure for easy verification of the properties presented by and about any identity container. 

## Why Self-Sovereign Identity?

Today, identity systems are administered by centralized authorities such as governments, businesses, professional and educational institutions, and software platform providers. These authorities have a vested interest in constraining subjects' ability to manage their identities both on and offline; they can terminate their ability to interact with relational circles at a moment's notice and may even be able to deauthenticate access to valuable resources, such as bank accounts, legal representation, and linked remote sites. 

Some measure of control over how people interact within a jurisdictional space is, of course, to be expected from institutions that have their own legal corporate personhood and a mandate to govern that space by serving and protecting its constituents. States and corporations have their own sovereignties as well which are not absolutely overridden by individual self-sovereignty. Nevertheless, the rise of the centralized internet has inflated the jurisdictional power of legacy authority structures to unprecedented proportions, even as it has destabilized it. What has been referred to as "surveillance" capitalism" is the nexus of private and public corporate actors who collude to strip mine individual citizens for data through unceasing, one-way observation. In this way, economic and political incentives align to marginalize individual leverage in day-to-day activities, even as individuals now have access to unprecedented amplification through web-based media. This "split" characterizes the strange bipolarity of our age: hyperindividualism amidst regimes of ever-tightening control. 

The rise of surveillance capitalism lends a troubling cast to popular momentum toward providing everyone in the world with a legal identity. For example, UN Sustainable Development Goal 16.9 requires that "By 2030, [we] provide legal identity for all, including birth registration". Having a legal identity is undoubtedly a cornerstone of participation in an upwardly-mobile and increasingly global education system as well as obtaining above-board access to global markets and avenues for formal civic participation. Yet without the protections of self-sovereign identity, there is no guarantee that authorities will not abuse digital identities in unprecedented ways. When digital identities are conferred by a state, NGO, or corporation, what is to prevent these parties from acting as though they are the true owners and custodians of the digital identities they provide for people who otherwise would not have them? Without fallbacks to other identity containers, how will high-stakes, monolithic digital identities (for example, the Aadhaar biometric ID system pioneered in India) remove avenues of recourse in the event of data breaches or abuses of power? How would regimes of digital patronage and control impact the billions of people around the world who seek freedom of access and sustainability on more or less autonomous terms? 

These questions will be answered through architectures that are being constructed today. 

## Ten Principles

[The Path to Self-Sovereign Identity](https://www.coindesk.com/path-self-sovereign-identity/), arguably the first article to explicitly spell out criteria for self-sovereign identity, was first published on April, 2016. Since that time, the concept has enjoyed widespread adoption. However, it is still in the early stages of acceptance, and its ramifications are being worked out in real time. 

The original article on self-sovereign identity included a list of ten self-sovereign principles. They were intended as a starting point for discussion. Some may indeed be critical, while others may be collapsible or less necessary.

In brief, these ten potential principles are:

      1. **Existence.** Users must have an independent existence. 
      2. **Control.** Users must control their identities. 
      3. **Access.** Users must have access to their own data.
      4. **Transparency.** Systems and algorithms must be transparent.
      5. **Persistence.** Identities must be long-lived.
      6. **Portability.** Information and services about identity must be transportable.
      7. **Interoperability.** Identities should be as widely usable as possible.
      8. **Consent.** Users must agree to the use of their identity. 
      9. **Minimalization.** Disclosure of claims must be minimized. 
      10. **Protection.** The rights of users must be protected.

Further discussion of these principles is available in [the original article](https://www.coindesk.com/path-self-sovereign-identity/). More recently, Natalie Smolenski reviewed specific issues of "control" of identity properties in [Owned vs. Unowned Claims and Self-Sovereign Identity](https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/topics-and-advance-readings/owned-vs-unowned-claims-and-ssi.md).

## Self-Sovereign Identity Systems

The above principles describe both the philosophy and technical requirements behind self-sovereign identity systems. The first three principles are the most important bases of a technical implementation: when we say that users must have existence, and that they must have access and control over their identity, we imagine an identity system where the user is king. The monarchial analogy is not simply evocative; rather, the concept of political sovereignty in Europe was first worked out by jurisprudents with reference to the person--both corporate and individual--of the K/king. A discussion of this history is far beyond the scope of this paper; however, what is important here is that sovereignty over time came to be defined as self-subsisting and self-evident; that is, the thing for which no prior account could be given but which was in fact the account giver. The sovereign is, in theory, the source of law, not the other way around. 

What this meant in practice, of course, was violently contested, and what sovereignty means is being contested again today. Yet the advent of computation has given debates about the strucutres and limits of competing sovereignties a much more formal cast. For example, combining the first principle, existence, with the sixth principle, portability, evokes an identity system that creates identity containers as discrete units, with specific access, and with the ability to package up their properties and bring them to different identity containers provided by different services. Or, conceivably, an identity "service" would no longer be a priori required, but rather an optional investment by the individual. Thus, self-sovereign identity is no longer bound to an organization, a corporation, or a nation-state; instead it resides with the user, who can temporarily house it where he sees fit. As recalled above, while formally identity is a container, that container can be multiple, and it can transform (i.e. relocate and change shape) over time. 

Any self-sovereign identity needs to begin with a trusted root, which is the minimalist definition of a digital identity container and allows for addressability over time. That is the focus of the first major implementation of self-sovereign identity: the Decentralized Identifier, or DID, which is now a [W3C draft](https://w3c-ccg.github.io/did-spec/). The [DID Primer](did-primer.md) contains extensive information on DIDs and other related specifications; in short, DIDs provide a methodology for proving control over a key which can be used to prove identity. Blockchains are the basis of many DID methodologies. 

Self-sovereign identity also requires that these containers be able to make claims about each other; claims-making and claims-verifying is how people "keep track of each other", to recall the basis of functional identity. This is the heart of another major project related to self-sovereign identity, the Verifiable Claims initiative, which includes a [W3C working group](https://www.w3.org/2017/vc/WG/). Manu Sporny has reviewed this project in [A Primer on Verifiable Claims](https://github.com/WebOfTrustInfo/rebooting-the-web-of-trust-fall2017/blob/master/topics-and-advance-readings/verifiable-claims-primer.md).

Doubtless, there will be other approaches to self-sovereign identity in the future, as the philosophy behind these identities is still evolving along with the technical infrastructures through which it will be put into practice. Nevertheless, now is the time to begin committing to self-sovereignty in earnest, both materially and morally. In a world where network effects are amplifying the velocity of social change at an exponential rate, it is important that we begin amplifying the leverage of those who lack the incumbent advantages of already highly-networked social actors. Traditionally, these people, who comprise the "long tail" of network power laws, have been seen as a force to be reckoned with collectively--but now they can also be empowered individually. We owe everyone this empowerment if we are to build a more just and equitable world. 
